# Lab Report: Zine You Around

#### Devon Regan

## Process Description

In this lab we were joined by Molly Brown from the Archives & Special Collections Department at Snell Library, who taught us how to fold a simple 8-page zine out of a single sheet of paper. A huge stack of magazines made the classroom surface one big collage space for the length of our class time as my peers and I set out to tell stories with the materials we had been given. At the end, everyone went around to present what the time and space for creativity had yielded.

## Observations

I went into this lab not quite knowing what story I wanted to tell, and thus my focus was more on just finding visually pleasing content to layer in interesting ways than centering around a cohesive theme, as many of my peers managed to do. I loved the easy nature of the creative space that was created there - with the inspiration that a world of content unleashed, the possibility for conversation flowed. Creative or personal or otherwise, lots of people had things to say and share about themselves that they didn't normally. And we helped each other out! Molly was looking for dogs to put in her zine; people needed various letters and commissioned the rest of us for help; the space was one of creative support and community - tapping into the very essence of zine-making. It was one of my favorite moments of the semester.

As I mentioned earlier, most of my time was spent seeking and cutting out interesting things, so that I only managed to get the cover of my zine done by the time it was time to share. Perhaps in part due to my preference for the art and content of feminist magazines but also love for small creatures and sense of sexual humor disjointed from meaning, I ended up collecting a lot of green and reptilian artifacts, and mentions of the word 'cock.' I saved all of the clippings I collected, so hopefully I can find a space over break to make it into something more meaningful, and hopefully incorporate more text.

I loved seeing everyone else's take on the activity - we had all been given the same space and materials, yet approached it in very different ways. Some people were already onto their second zine, and that's not to say their first ones weren't beautiful and cohesive in their own right. I think it was David who concocted his zine out of a collection of things he found annoying or otherwise didn't particularly like. Evidently not everyone is as much as a debilitative perfectionist as I, but not to their detriment.

## Analysis

I've always had a general understanding of what zines were, as an avid Tumblr user and reader of the now-defunct [Rookie Mag](https://rookiemag.com) in my adolescence, but until I read Pagan Kennedy's reflections of what zine-making meant to her, I never understood the true cultural and personal significance of the practice. Although we largely talk about the meaning of zines in terms of resistance and advocacy, they hold just as much importance as personal narratives and modes of expression.

Molly spoke at length about what zine-making meant to her as a form of resistance. She compared it to a "finsta" in terms of its self-expressive capacity, yet in a form removed from the invasive data-mining and privacy concerns we are inherently subject to as social media users. Instagram, for example, censors female nipples. Why? Zines hold no such censorship, so that anything can be published in there without being tagged as a violation or security concern/anarchist by whatever algorithms those platforms have in place for their own profit and benefit. Facebook owns Instagram now and we all know how problematic their digital ethics are. Advertising trumps all.

Zine-making holds such a unique space in terms of ethics, privacy concerns, and subversion of canon. Borsuk's chapter "The Book As Interface" highlights this by describing the book as "an interface through which we encounter ideas" (197). The nature of zines being self-published means that nobody is moderating their content based on what is commercially acceptable or considered "worth" the money put into publishing it. In their heyday they were dispersed by hand or mail order referenced in zines within the same or adjacent networks, so that ideas were spread within local communities and often relevant to their readers in a more intimate way than just any book, magazine, or newspaper they'd pick up. The physical limitations of producing zines to be inexpensive and easily replicated meant that they were commonly Xeroxed, making the materiality of the elements collaged together to create the object apparent in a way that standard published books didn't offer.

And, since zines are circulated in these more personal spaces, there is a sense of safety associated with publishing authentic content. We were assigned to read the Zine Librarians' "Code of Ethics," which detailed (in zine format, of course) ways of ensuring that the authors' rights aren't violated just because they don't hold copyright - in terms of permissions, acquisition (to make sure authors are adequately compensated), and basic respect itself. It holds a sense of regard for the community and personhood of those involved that is frankly refreshing in light of the capitalistic, blind-consumption-fraught society we find ourselves in today. The sphere of zine making and circulation subverts convention to inject intentionality back into every stage of the process. 
