# Lab Report: Electronic Literature

#### Devon Regan

## Process Description

In this lab we received a brief introduction to [Twine](https://www.twinery.org), which describes itself as "an open source tool for telling interactive, nonlinear stories." Although it offers both desktop and web versions, I opted for the latter since my laptop's disk space has been dwindling. Aided by Allison Parish's [tutorial](http://catn.decontextualize.com/twine/), I switched the default language to "SugarCube" and went on my way experimenting with this program.

## Observations

Twine isn't a complicated software to get started with, as it is essentially a series of passages that accept basic HTML and are connected in myriad ways. However, like many of the programs we've worked with this semester, I got the feeling there is a lot of potential functionality underlying the basics whose existence I don't even know about. Professor Cordell mentioned that Twine holds the possibility for scorekeeping, and the option to filter any given page's options by that score or by whether or not certain pages have already been visited by the user. I'm sure if I came into this activity with a story I was burning to tell, I could figure out ways to find and implement them to its benefit. But for the scope of this lab, I was content to set out exploring the possibilities and implications of basic decision making on a Friday morning. What if you just stopped doing what was expected of you, with only imaginary consequences?

This form of storytelling is largely appealing for this reason. In an age where dwindling attention spans are oft discussed (I've learned, in trying to make up the work for this class, that mine is approximately 3 minutes), being able to shape the course of your own story is much more compelling than simply consuming a linear narrative that has been laid out for you. The interactivity of it draws you in; makes your choices significant rather than the often mindless inconsequential interactions of social media; and urges you to think about action and consequence.

## Analysis

Jon Bois' "What Football Will Look Like In The Future" offers out a powerful theoretical exploration of how a staple of American culture's entertainment will operate millennia from now. In the year 17776, humans are immortal, knowledge is abstracted not to particularly mean anything (Bois posits that it will stagnate, in fact, in favor of simplicity), and entertainment operates on a massive scale, with some games being utterly pointless by nature (i.e. the thousands-of-miles by football-field-width course that leaves players stuck in a valley for eternity) and others destroying priceless relics (like when a cannon-blasted rock destroyed a [lightbulb](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Centennial_Light) that hadn't burnt out in centuries). Players get swept up in tornadoes, hide in caves for centuries, and collect signed footballs by a backup quarterback from the 1990s who nobody particularly cared about in his day. They stake claims over

Despite the narrative depth and level of irony that this piece takes on, as well as the attention it has managed to accrue from disparate interest groups, it was written by a real sports writer at SB Nation. A Louisville native, Bois is adamant that this piece is, in fact, a commentary on _what football will look like in the future_, however its juxtaposition of emotional depth and utter nonsense resonate with you. It's presented in a multimedia format, using video and image that spans to fill the window, anchored by black space to emulate space or contrast the commonly white-dominant pages of the internet, consuming your attention so that the narrative engulfs you. Bois is a sportswriter, so he took on the help of some coders and developers to put this story into its full potential, which brings me back to my observation about not knowing the full affordances of Twine - a narrative is only as powerful as its presentation, and likewise **technology's potential means little until it is enacted in a meaningful way.**

Craig Mod extends this inquiry in "Future Reading" as he chronicles his disillusionment with ebooks' failure to live up to the potential that he eagerly envisioned in their early days. What Kindle did for reading was immense - being given the ability to access books from anywhere was revolutionary. But as the years have passed and Amazon has maintained a monopoly in the ebook market, the technology has stagnated. What purpose does innovation have when there is no push from competition? Books are filtered through the sterility of the closed-system Amazon marketplace - which, despite enabling accessibility affordances like the ability to change typeface and size - eliminates the nuance and "freshness of experience" that print books maintain in the intentionality of publishing. "Closed system" suggests that all stages of a book's publication lie in the hands of one person, as opposed to an "open system" where publishers and designers are "bound to no single option at most steps of the production process." Mod urges the reevaluation of Amazon's closed system to **put creative control back in the hands of the people who care about these intentional choices, rather than let the meaning of their work become watered down by corporate greed.** What if Kindle books could enact the potential of immersive storytelling that "What Football Will Look Like In The Future" boasts? 
